---
title: 14. Normal Subgroups and Quotient Groups
tags:
  - zk
  - abstract algebra
  - group theory
  - normal subgroup
  - quotient group
---

# WTF zk Tutorial Lesson 14: Normal Subgroups and Quotient Groups

In the previous lecture, we discussed cosets, which are sets generated by subgroups and element operations but are not groups. However, when a subgroup satisfies specific properties, cosets can form a group. Such subgroups are called normal subgroups, and the group formed by cosets is called a quotient group. In this lecture, we will delve deeper into these concepts.

## 1. Normal Subgroups

A normal subgroup is a special type of subgroup in group theory, where its left cosets and right cosets are the same sets.

Definition: Given a group $G$ and its subgroup $H$, if for any $g \in G$, we have $gH = Hg$ (left coset equals right coset), then $H$ is called a normal subgroup of $G$, denoted as $H \trianglelefteq G$.

This definition is sometimes written as $gHg^{-1} = H$. The operation of the form $aXa^{-1}$ is also called conjugation. In other words, a normal subgroup is a subgroup that remains invariant under conjugation. For an element $h$ in a normal subgroup $H$ and any $g \in G$, we have $ghg^{-1} \in H$.

Any group $G$ has two trivial normal subgroups: <span>$\{e\}$</span> and $G$.

In cryptography, subgroups of commonly used groups are basically all normal subgroups. For example, in the integer addition group $\mathbb{Z}$, any of its subgroups $n\mathbb{Z} = \set{..., -2n, -n, 0, n, 2n, ...}$ are normal subgroups. This is because for any integer $k$, the left coset and right coset generated by the addition operation with $n\mathbb{Z}$ are equal: $k+n\mathbb{Z} = n\mathbb{Z} + k$. Another example is the integer modulo $5$ multiplication group. Since multiplication is commutative, its left cosets are also equal to its right cosets, and any subgroup is a normal subgroup.

## 2. Quotient Groups

When a subgroup is a normal subgroup, the cosets it constructs can form a group, which is called a quotient group.

Definition: Given a group $(G,🐔)$ and its normal subgroup $H$, the quotient group $(G/H, 🐶)$ (read as G modulo H). The set of the quotient group consists of all left cosets $G/H = \set{gH \mid g \in G}$. The 🐶 operation of the quotient group is defined between two cosets. For $g_1, g_2 \in G$, we have $(g_1H) 🐶 (g_2H) = (g_1🐔g_2)H$.

Quotient groups are different from the groups we are familiar with. Each element is a left coset in the form of $gH$, not a number. You can understand the 🐶 operation as the 🐔 operation between cosets, <span>$(g_1H) 🐶 (g_2H) = g_1Hg_2H$</span>. The 🐶 operation is well-defined only when the subgroup is a normal subgroup, where $g_1Hg_2H=g_1(Hg_2)H=g_1g_2HH=g_1g_2H$. For simplicity, we will omit the 🐶 operation and denote it as $(g_1H) (g_2H)$.

Next, let's check if the quotient group satisfies the four basic properties of a group:

1. **Closure:** By definition, for any $g_1H, g_2H \in G/H$, we have $(g_1H)(g_2H)=(g_1g_2)H$. Since $g_1g_2 \in G$, we have $g_1g_2H \in G/H$, so closure holds.

2. **Associativity:** For any $g_1H, g_2H, g_3H \in G/H$, we have $[(g_1H)(g_2H)] (g_3H)= [(g_1g_2)H] (g_3H) =  (g_1g_2g_3)H$, and $(g_1H)[(g_2H)(g_3H)]=(g_1H)[(g_2g_3)H] =  (g_1g_2g_3)H$. Therefore, $[(g_1H)(g_2H)] (g_3H) = (g_1H) [(g_2H)(g_3H)]$, so associativity holds.

3. **Identity element:** $H$ is the identity element of $G/H$. Since the identity element of group $G$ is $e$, we have $eH = H$ as the coset of $H$, so $H \in G/H$. For any $gH \in G/H$, we have $gH H = g H$, so $H$ is the identity element of $G/H$.

4. **Inverse element:** For any $gH \in G/H$, the inverse element of $gH$ is $g^{-1}H$. Because $(gH)(g^{-1}H) = (gg^{-1})H = H$.

After verification, the quotient group satisfies the four basic properties of a group. Therefore, the quotient group is a group, which is great. Next, let's look at the order (number of elements) of the quotient group. Since the quotient group is a group composed of cosets, its order is the number of left cosets. According to Lagrange's theorem:

$$
|G/H| = [G:H]= [G]/[H]
$$

We can see that the order of the quotient group is the quotient of the order of the parent group and the subgroup, which is why it is called a "quotient group".

### 2.1 Examples

First, let's take the integer addition group $\mathbb{Z}$ and its normal subgroup $n\mathbb{Z}$ as an example. Its quotient group is $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$.

- In the quotient group, the coset $k + n\mathbb{Z}$ represents all integers that are congruent to $k$ modulo $n$. The order of this quotient group is $n$, and the elements are $0 + n\mathbb{Z}, 1 + n\mathbb{Z}, \ldots, (n-1) + n\mathbb{Z}$. The essence of this quotient group is actually the residue group modulo $n$.

- The operation of the quotient group is defined as $(a + n\mathbb{Z}) 🐶 (b + n\mathbb{Z}) = (a+b) + n\mathbb{Z}$, which still belongs to $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$.

- Identity element: $0 + n\mathbb{Z}$

- Inverse element: The inverse of $k + n\mathbb{Z}$ is $-k + n\mathbb{Z}$.

Next, let's take the modulo $5$ multiplication group $\mathbb{Z}^*_5$ and its normal subgroup $H=\set{1,4}$ as an example.

- The quotient group is $\mathbb{Z}^*_5/H=\set{\set{1,4}, \set{2,3}}$, with an order of $2 = 4/2$.

- Since our example is a multiplication group, the operation between quotient groups is also modulo 5 multiplication between cosets.

- Identity element: $\set{1,4}$, because $\set{1,4} 🐶 \set{1,4} = \set{1 \times 1, 1 \times 4, 4 \times 1, 4 \times 4} = {1,4}$, and $\set{1,4} 🐶 \set{2,3} = \set{2,3}$.

- Inverse element: The inverse of $\set{1,4}$ is $\set{1,4}$, and the inverse of $\set{2,3}$ is $\set{2,3}$.

## 3. Quotient Groups and Congruence Relations

In the previous lecture, we used cosets to extend the congruence relation of integers to groups, forming a special equivalence relation: for a group $G$ and its subgroup $H$, if elements $a$ and $b$ belong to the same coset of $H$, we say $a$ and $b$ are congruent modulo $H$, denoted as $a \equiv b \pmod{H}$. In the quotient group, this congruence relation is even more special:

**1. Operation closure** Since the quotient group is a group formed by cosets of a normal subgroup, the operation is well-defined. For elements $a, b, c, d$ in group $G$ and a normal subgroup $H$, if $a \equiv b \pmod{H}$ and $c \equiv d \pmod{H}$, then $ac \equiv bd \pmod{H}$.

**2. Each element in the quotient group represents an equivalence class in the group** The quotient group $G/H$ is structurally a simplification of the group $G$. Each element in the quotient group is a coset and preserves the operation of group $G$. Through the congruence relation, each element in the quotient group represents an equivalence class in the group.

We will delve deeper into the good properties of quotient groups in the next lecture when we introduce homomorphisms and isomorphisms.

## 4. Summary

In this lecture, we introduced two important concepts in group theory: normal subgroups and quotient groups. A normal subgroup is a special kind of subgroup where its generated left cosets and right cosets are equal, $gH=Hg$. This property is satisfied by most common groups in cryptography. When a subgroup is a normal subgroup, the cosets, which were originally just sets, can form a group called a quotient group. You can understand the quotient group as a kind of residue group, which can help us better understand the structure of groups and can also be used to construct cryptographic algorithms. We will continue to study it in the future.
